Paper: The Space to Build It: How Scientific Needs Shaped an Ecosystem (#1251)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/jarrod_millman/main.md

Author: @pushkarsathe89 Thanks for your feedback. I've addressed all reviewer comments. I've fixed the references.  I use semantic line breaks (https://sembr.org/) so I suspect there was some rendering issue in the website. I checked the PDF / HTML and I couldn't find any single sentence paragraphs. I removed some early reference to ecosystem and defined it the first time in used it in the paper's main body.

---
# Ensure that this title is the same as the one in `myst.yml`

> title: "The Space to Build It: How Scientific Needs Built an Ecosystem"

Reviewer: To get rid of the double needs, consider for the second Built a word like "cultivated", "forged", or "fostered".

Author: Maybe "The Space to Build It: How Scientific Needs Shaped an Ecosystem"? Other suggestions?

Author: See a2b82f7.

abstract: |
  Open, community-owned scientific software does not emerge from good intentions alone; it takes real scientific needs, cross-domain collaboration, community coordination, and institutional anchors.

>   This paper traces one thread of how that combination played out: how a concrete problem in neuroimaging led to a 2005 meeting at UC Berkeley, then to a series of collaborations across astronomy, neuroscience, physics, and statistics, and eventually to the coordination structures and academic homes that now help sustain the scientific Python ecosystem.

Reviewer: "thread [or example] of how one such a combination played out" or "example of how that combination plays out".

Reviewer: Can also try to avoid repeat of how in these two sub-sentences.

Author: See 3b41c6f.

## The 2005 meeting

As we planned a neuroimaging meeting for March 2005 at Berkeley, we were watching the `numpy-discussion` threads that followed Travis's January `numeric3` design proposal [@oliphant2005updating] and February status update [@oliphant2005numeric3].
In those posts, Travis described `numeric3` as a bridge between `numeric` and `numarray`, based largely on the `numeric` code base, and emphasized the need to keep `numeric`'s tight homogeneous-array implementation moving forward while still learning from `numarray`.
The idea that `numeric` and `numarray` should eventually merge was there, but only as an aspiration.
By inviting Travis (`numeric3`) and Perry (`numarray`) to join the Berkeley meeting and to speak with Guido van Rossum (`python`) and Paul (`numeric`), we hoped to turn that aspiration into a shared plan for a unified array object and package.

The first day was a hands-on laboratory, "_Scientific Python for Neuroscience Research_," taught by Fernando and John and designed to make `numeric`, `scipy`, `ipython`, `matplotlib`, and related tools immediately usable for working neuroimaging scientists.

> The next two days were split into two parallel tracks: one, focused on neuroimaging; the other, worked through whether and how a unified array object could be built that preserved the strengths of both `numeric` and `numarray`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next two days were split into two parallel tracks: one, focused on neuroimaging; the other worked through whether and how a unified array object could be built that preserved the strengths of both `numeric` and `numarray`.
```

Travis committed to spending the following five to six months making `scipy_core`.
That commitment culminated, eighteen months later, in the release of `numpy 1.0` in October 2006 [@oliphant2006numpy1.0].

## Building the foundation

While transformational in its unification of the ecosystem, `numpy 1.0` was just the beginning of what needed to be built.
A scientific computing platform, comparable to what MATLAB or IDL provided, required far more: a vast collection of mature, performant algorithms spanning optimization, signal processing, linear algebra, statistics, differential equations, and more; a plotting system; an interactive environment; and the documentation, testing, and packaging infrastructure that makes all of it installable, trustworthy, and teachable.

> By resolving the array fragmentation that had made building on the ecosystem feel risky, it gave the community a single stable library to build on, together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, importantly, resolving the array fragmentation that had made building on the ecosystem feel risky, `numpy` gave the community a single stable library to build on, together.
```

Two fixes here: (1) the paragraph says "numpy was important, but we had a lot to build"; the last sentence then needs to connect back to numpy. (2) "it" in this sentence is too far from NumPy to make that connection, so made it explicit in this edit.

A mailing list can carry information, but it cannot carry the trust required to trade a position for a compromise; that trade happens face to face, and only when the people trading it have been given the standing, and the time, to spend on it.
The rooms get bigger later (a sprint, then a summit), but the trade being made in each one is the same one this paper returns to at the end.
:::

# How to grow

For the first decade, `numpy` and `scipy` developers were essentially the same people, releasing two different packages from the same small, tightly connected group.
The `scipy` toolkits, or `scikits`, began as another layer that we built on the same shared infrastructure, largely with the same hands.
The SciPy conference was organized by that same small group as well.
Over the decade that followed, each of these developed a community of its own, increasingly separate from the others and, eventually, separate from the people who had founded them.
The clearest trace of that shift is almost bureaucratic: `numpy.scipy.org` became `numpy.org`; `ipython.scipy.org` became `ipython.org`; `astropy.scipy.org` became `astropy.org`; and `neuroimaging.scipy.org` became `nipy.org`.

> Each rename looks like housekeeping.

Reviewer: I would remove this sentence; it feels a bit robotic.

Taken together, they add up to something larger: SciPy stopped being one thing.
<!--
https://web.archive.org/web/20070622150504/http://new.scipy.org/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100211214922/http://new.scipy.org/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100419182500/http://new.scipy.org/content.html
-->

<!--
Travis Oliphant in his "Future directions for SciPy in light of meeting at Berkeley" 2005 email wrote:
"Many scientists used Python; few were SciPy devotees and even fewer contributed to SciPy."

Stéfan van der Walt in his "The future of SciPy and its development infrastructure" 2009 email wrote:
"SciPy has a large user community relative to the number of developers. A big library of code, used by many scientists, is supported by a small handful of people all over the world."
-->

## Infrastructure and diaspora

> In February 2009, Stéfan van der Walt posted to the `scipy-dev` list with a subject line that, unknown to him, echoed Travis Oliphant's email after the 2005 Berkeley meeting: "_The future of SciPy and its development infrastructure_" [vanderwalt2009future].

Reviewer: I notice that this citation, and the one below to Gael's post, don't resolve. Check citation format.

He had just run a Birds of a Feather session on establishing a standard machine learning package, building on the `scikits.learn` code from David Cournapeau's 2007 GSoC project that I had mentored.
The enthusiasm had been "huge," he wrote, and he was ready to move quickly.
But "in order to streamline the process, we need a mailing list, version control and a website."

Getting a new project onto the SciPy infrastructure meant asking a busy administrator, sometimes including me, to add it.
The server itself was failing: `httpd` crashed spontaneously and had to be restarted manually, and adding new projects was difficult and time-consuming.
The infrastructure was not failing because anyone was neglectful.
It was old hardware, a layered history of configuration decisions, and an operating system that needed a full reinstall, all sitting under a fast-growing ecosystem and a small group who could no longer maintain it on the side.

Given the server situation, I recommended that Gaël look into other options.
That conversation was not unique; projects from statsmodels to `scikit-image` were reaching the same conclusion by the same route.

> What followed was more than a technical migration. It was an identity shift.

Reviewer: Another robotic-sounding sentence combo. Would edit.

The `scikits` had started as extensions to `scipy`, built by much the same small group, on the same shared infrastructure.
Once they left, most stopped describing themselves that way at all.
`scikits.learn` became scikit-learn; other projects grew up with no connection to the `scikits` name or idea whatsoever.
What had been imagined as one layer of a tool stack (`numpy`, `scipy`, and the `scikits`) became part of a larger ecosystem of independent projects built on top of a shared foundation.

## Community and conference

For the first six years, Enthought had organized the conference and Caltech's Center for Advanced Computing Research had hosted it, with Enthought sponsoring students and handling logistics.

> In 2008, Travis Vaught of Enthought and I served as co-chairs, Gaël Varoquaux as program chair, and a recruited program committee set the program. For the first time, a proceedings review process produced published conference proceedings [cite].

Reviewer: Missing citation.

2008 was also the first EuroSciPy, held in Leipzig, Germany.
Travis gave the keynote.
In 2009, Prabhu Ramachandran and I co-chaired the first SciPy India Conference.

> Travis gave the keynote.

Reviewer: Wow, Travis was a popular keynote speaker 😅

Author: I had planned to say something more about his keynotes. But since I never got around to it, I decided to remove the two keynote mentions.

<!--
https://web.archive.org/web/20190909080804/http://scipy.github.io/old-wiki/pages/EuroSciPy2008.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20251016230532/https://scipy.in/2009
https://www.space-kerala.org/first-indian-scipy-conference-held-trivandrum
-->

> Conference proceedings, published and citable, were a mechanism for converting that invisible work into something a tenure file could recognize.

Reviewer: What does "that" refer to in this sentence?

Maybe something like "converting all the invisible work done on creating and maintaining the ecosystem" (perhaps not ecosystem, haven't used that word yet, but you get the gist).

Papers were submitted as reStructuredText source in a public GitHub repository; review happened in the open, via pull requests attached to identifiable individuals; reviewers were acknowledged by name.

> The toolchain, developed with Gaël Varoquaux and extended by Stéfan van der Walt into a system using Sphinx, LaTeX, custom scripts, and the `procbuild` preview bot, was an early instance of what would later be called "open peer review" and put into practice the principles I articulated in a 2012 paper titled "_Learning from Open Source Software Projects to Improve Scientific Review_" [cite].

Reviewer: Missing citation.

> Its goal was explicitly iterative: reviewers and editors worked with authors to guide papers toward acceptance, so that submitting to SciPy meant opening your writing to the same collaborative scrutiny that good open source development demands.

Reviewer: This to me remains one of the most magical things we did with the SciPy proceedings—it completely changed the relationship between author and reviewer!

By the end of the decade, "SciPy the conference" was clearly its own institution, with its own leadership and rhythms, loosely connected to the library and no longer run by the same small group.

## Lesson 2

A shared technical foundation is more than scaffolding: it is part of what holds a community together. But holding together and staying uniform are not the same thing.
When that foundation stopped scaling, the people who depended on it did not disappear; they found their own paths, and what followed looked, from the outside, like fragmentation.
From the inside it was something closer to growth: the same people, carrying norms first worked out together, building new things in new places, and discovering by experiment what a much larger ecosystem would need next.

The conference took a different route to the same outcome.
Rather than scattering under pressure, it was deliberately opened: from a company-run event serving one small circle to a community-governed institution with its own proceedings, its own international meetings, and eventually its own leadership drawn from far beyond the group that had built `numpy` and `scipy`.

> Where the infrastructure diaspora and the `scikits`' departure were responses to something breaking, the conference's growth was a choice: proof that differentiation did not have to wait for a crisis to happen on purpose.

Reviewer: "proof that..." — was a crisis truly imminent there? It feels more like what you wrote before: as more people attended the conference, we were able to draw on a larger group. These were also different skills: people who enjoyed organizing conferences, vs working on arcane code bases.

:::{important} One thing became many, by accident and by design.
The ecosystem scattered because the infrastructure that held them broke; the conference grew apart because the people running it chose to let it.

> Both count as differentiation, but only one of them required a crisis first. That is the more useful lesson for a community trying to grow on purpose, rather than waiting to be forced.

Reviewer: So, what, ultimately, is the lesson here? That you need to watch for evolutionary phase changes in your projects and activities, and help them evolve to handle challenges as they grow?

:::

# How to last

At the end of the second decade we faced a new problem: there was no longer anyone with the mandate, or the mechanism, to hold the ecosystem together.

> As individual projects matured, whole scientific domains (neuroimaging, geospatial data science, high-energy physics) developed their own internal coordination structures, mailing lists, and governance conventions.

Reviewer: May need a bit of clarification: it's not the domains that developed coordination structures, it's the domain stacks inside of the scientific Python ecosystem.

This domain-level organization was healthy in many respects.
It also meant that an increasing amount of work that was really ecosystem-wide in scope, packaging standards, CI practices, documentation tooling, was being developed in domain-specific silos and reinvented independently across communities.
Newer maintainers and contributors built careers within a single project or domain rather than across several.
The cross-disciplinary experience that those of us who had been there at the beginning carried was no longer naturally transmitted to the next generation.
The `scipy.org` website (nominally maintained by the `scipy` library team, effectively serving as the ecosystem's front door) had become a symbol of that failure of transmission: a shared resource that no one had the mandate to govern.

## Ecosystem coordination

> In 2020, Stéfan and I co-founded the Scientific Python Project (SPP) with support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation [@scientificpython2020planning] to provide what the ecosystem needed, not the SciPy server's centralized infrastructure, which individual projects had rightly outgrown, but a shared layer above the individual projects: cross-project recommendations, developer summits that worked like the early sprints (small, cross-disciplinary, and work-focused), shared tooling and discussion forums, and a common landing page for the ecosystem `scientific-python.org`.

Reviewer: I'd tidy up this sentence a bit: saying SP was found to provide what the ecosystem needed is, per definition true, but it feels a bit strange to state it that way. And saying immediately what it was NOT meant to address distracts.

It was founded to address a lack of coordination between the domain stacks. I think it can be stated more simply than what is written here.

> Early community outreach by Juanita Gomez and project leadership by Brigitta Sipőcz were especially important in turning SPP from a small node into a functioning ecosystem hub.

Reviewer: "small node into functioning ecosystem hub" — tidy up language.

The 2023 Scientific Python Developer Summit illustrated what this cross-project coordination makes possible.
Henry Schreiner had developed a comprehensive development guide for the `scikit-hep` community, high-energy physics, that covered modern packaging, testing, CI, documentation, and more; in parallel, Dan Allan at the National Synchrotron Light Source II had developed complementary guidelines for his community.
Both guides addressed concerns that had nothing to do with the specific scientific domain and everything to do with the shared challenge of building maintainable scientific Python packages.

> At the summit, that work was merged, rebranded as an ecosystem-wide resource, and released as the Scientific Python Development Guide [sppdevguide2023]: a signal, concrete and deliberate, that domain-specific silos could be dissolved when the right forum existed to bring people together.

Reviewer: Another broken citation; at least in a `myst start` render.

Our neuroimaging collaboration brought Fernando Pérez to Berkeley's Brain Imaging Center (BIC) as a research scientist around 2008, where he continued developing IPython and, not long after, co-founded Project Jupyter.
Over the years that followed, scientific Python and Jupyter colleagues who came to Berkeley for a meeting, a sprint, or a few months of collaboration became part of life at the BIC and, later, at Berkeley more broadly.
Min Ragan-Kelley (`ipython` and later `jupyter`) was among those who first came to work alongside us this way, one of many such visits I won't try to enumerate.
The pull reached graduate students, too.
Kirstie Whitaker, then a neuroimaging PhD student, has described how Cindee Madison (part of our neuroimaging collaboration) mentored her in learning Python and navigating open source norms and culture, ultimately reshaping her career. Kirstie's is one version of a story that played out, in smaller ways, across generations of Berkeley researchers who found themselves drawn into the ecosystem they had only meant to borrow a tool from.

That gravitational pull eventually helped reorganize the university around it.

> The same community of scientific Python and Jupyter contributors that had been informally passing through Berkeley helped establish the Berkeley Institute for Data Science (BIDS), which Fernando co-founded, and BIDS' early success fed into the university's decision to launch the College of Computing, Data Science, and Society and, within it, a Data Science major that is now the largest on campus [cite].

Reviewer: Missing citation.

> The undergraduate curriculum built on that foundation, Data 8 and Data 100, uses NumPy, SciPy, Matplotlib, and Jupyter notebooks as the substrate for the largest introductory and largest upper-division courses at Berkeley, where thousands of students each semester do hands-on computational work without sacrificing rigor [cite].

Reviewer: What is the meaning of "without sacrificing rigor"?

That curriculum did not stay on campus: more than fifty universities and colleges have since adopted Data 8 or its components, several through Berkeley-supported partnerships with the National Science Foundation's CloudBank project that extended the same open-source, cloud-based teaching stack to community colleges and other UC campuses [cite].

> BIDS today is where that convergence is easiest to see.

Reviewer: May be worth spelling out "that convergence".

Reviewer 2: I agree. I think it is a bit unclear.

Author: That is left over from a previous version of this section. I am going to remove it.

Fernando is now the Faculty Director, a decade after co-founding it; Stéfan and Min work there on the technical and infrastructure side; Kirstie, the graduate student whose career had once been redirected by conversations with Cindee, returned in 2025 as BIDS's Executive Director; and I lead Berkeley's Open Source Program Office from within it.
Fernando has written that Berkeley's leadership in this stack "is not 'owned' by Berkeley," but built by scientists who "partner with an extended, distributed community of other researchers and developers to build an ecosystem that benefits all" [cite].

> This is the same community-ownership argument this paper opened with in 2003, now stated at the level of a university rather than a single lab.

Reviewer: The argument may be a bit hard to follow here; bears repeating?

Author: See 9597023.

What comes next is not yet settled.
Fernando has described BIDS as a space for open scholarship, open source, and interdisciplinary collaboration on AI in science and society [cite], and how artificial intelligence reshapes the way scientists write code, teach it, and learn it is the open problem this community will now have to work out together, in much the same way it once worked out the future of the array object in a room in Berkeley.

## Lesson 3

Why did two of the most consequential projects in scientific computing (the scientific Python and Jupyter ecosystems) have roots inside a neuroimaging lab at Berkeley that was not, on paper, in the software business at all?

One condition that mattered enormously was how Mark D'Esposito ran his lab.
Mark wanted good people in the lab producing good work, and he trusted his team enough to let them pursue what they judged important, even when it sometimes drifted far from neuroscience.

> That trust is what let Matthew, Fernando Pérez, and me spend real time on scientific Python and, later, Jupyter, work that was not in any of our job descriptions and that did not, on its own, advance the neuroscience questions the lab was trying to answer.

Reviewer: Yes, thinking back to it, Mark had tremendous impact on this community. Amazing that he allowed us to pursue this work along with the rest of the research. He had me as a postdoc too, Paul Ivanov was a regular—I think even hired there for a while, quite a few SciPy contributors worked from Barker & Giannini (Tom, Chris, etc. — hired by the NiPy grant I think). DiPy also had a major growth spurt ~2011, catalyzed by a meeting in Giannini, and Ariel was a frequent visitor. Too many people to name, but clearly a very important part of this story.

<!--
The same instinct is written into our Neuroimaging in Python (NIPY) collaboration's mission statement, drafted in the project's early years:

:::{blockquote}
The purpose of NIPY is to make it easier to do better brain imaging research. We believe that neuroscience ideas and analysis ideas develop together. Good ideas come from understanding; understanding comes from clarity, and clarity must come from well-designed teaching materials and well-designed software. The software must be designed as a natural extension of the underlying ideas.

--- [https://nipy.org/nipy/mission.html](https://nipy.org/nipy/mission.html)
:::
-->

Our collaborations with astronomers, physicists, and statisticians meant our tools were constantly tested against needs that had nothing to do with neuroimaging, which kept our discussions from narrowing into a closed conversation among people who already agreed with each other.
It also connected us to larger conversations about open science and reproducibility that were happening well outside any one department, so the problems we were facing were visibly the same problems other fields were running into.

> Matthew, Fernando, and I were lucky.

Reviewer: I ❤️ this paragraph. Thinking of all contributors, past and present, for whom this is a reality.

Reviewer 2: <3 <3 I agree. I think this really helps contextualize the scope of contributions and effort.

Many of the people who built and sustained this ecosystem did not have a Mark D'Esposito, and did the work anyway: on nights and weekends, on volunteered time, on the strength of believing in something their institutions gave them no formal credit for.
Some took real career risks to keep contributing.
Many could not sustain that position indefinitely and left for industry, where the demands of a job rarely leave room for the kind of unstructured, long-horizon tinkering that built the scientific Python and Jupyter ecosystems.
The space that made this possible was never distributed evenly, and a great deal of this ecosystem was built by people paying, personally, for a trust their own institutions were unwilling to extend.

> That is changing.

Reviewer: This sentence may be too strong 😅 

I agree more with the following sentence: remain exceptions rather than norms.

Author: I decide to keep this sentence for now, but made a change to the intro that is related to this point. See 9597023.

BIDS is one attempt to make institutionally what Mark gave informally: room, trust, and time, backed by something more durable than one director's goodwill.
But these remain exceptions rather than the norm, and they are not yet enough to catch everyone this ecosystem depended on and then let go.

:::{important} It was the space to build it.

> This ecosystem lasted because some people were trusted with room to decide what mattered and time to work on it.

Reviewer: The first lesson was about rooms, so room could be misread here—maybe talk about space or similiar. Or maybe fine.

Reviewer: to decide what mattered and *given* time to work on it

  The paper follows this shared path from its earliest concerns, through the architectural decisions and often invisible maintenance work that turned volunteer projects into shared infrastructure, and into the deliberate effort to recreate those early patterns at a larger scale.
  It closes with a reflection on who is trusted with the room and time to build such infrastructure, and who pays for that time when their institutions will not.
---

# Introduction

Open scientific software infrastructure often begins with a single actor---a researcher, a lab, a company---whose vision, energy, and effort make its creation possible.
And, while that initial focused, isolated effort may be required to start, it matters greatly what happens next.
Durable infrastructure is built in layers: a technical foundation, followed by community governance, and then, ideally, institutional support.
Each layer changes who holds the infrastructure: first from a single owner to a community, and later from informal practice to institutional support.
Each layer must be deliberately built, and rebuilt, as the infrastructure grows.
When those layers get built, the infrastructure becomes durable.

> When they do not, growth stalls and the burden of keeping it alive rests on a shrinking circle of people.

Reviewer 2: This is a great and compelling introduction!

This paper is personal.
It is shaped by the collaborations I was part of and the problems that were in front of me at the time.
Many of the people involved in this work would tell the story differently, from their own vantage points and concerns.

Each layer, once built, eventually stops working at the next scale, forcing the community to decide, consciously or not, whether and how to rebuild it.
The three sections that follow trace that building and rebuilding in turn: how the technical foundation got built ("How to start"), how the community that depended on it grew past what that foundation alone could hold together ("How to grow"), and how institutional anchors began to emerge, unevenly, to sustain some of what community practice alone could not carry indefinitely ("How to last").
A single mechanism recurs across all three: aspirations become plans, and plans become foundations, only when a small, cross-disciplinary group shares a room, more than once, rather than negotiating asynchronously from a distance.

> But describing those layers only explains how the ecosystem was built; it does not explain why researchers, scientists, and teachers who were not primarily programmers kept doing this work, often unpaid and unrecognized by the institutions that employed them.

Reviewer 2: Do you think "educators" might be appropriate to use here? It could include some folks who aren't explicitly instructing/teaching but may be part of this group more broadly.

> That deeper question---who is trusted with the room and time to build such infrastructure, and who pays for that time when their institutions will not---is the one this paper answers last, because the answer only becomes visible once the full three decades are in view.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean the past three decades of Python used for science? I think clarifying this last clause would be helpful.

# How to start

> In 2003, I supported a neuroimaging analysis pipeline at Berkeley that was an _ad hoc_ collection of MATLAB toolboxes, IDL routines, C/C++ programs, AWK scripts, and shell glue that nobody fully understood.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 2003, I supported a neuroimaging analysis pipeline at The University of California Berkeley that was an _ad hoc_ collection of MATLAB toolboxes, IDL routines, C/C++ programs, AWK scripts, and shell glue that nobody fully understood.
```

Reviewer 2: I too use Berkeley instead of the full university name, but I think it would be helpful to expand its first use.

Results from our center and others were difficult to verify.
There was no mechanism to rerun an analysis from raw data.
Scientific integrity was a clear concern, and it was made worse by technical constraints.
The academic incentive system amplified the problem: writing and maintaining analysis software did not appear in tenure files, open source authorship diluted traditional credit models, and computational reproducibility was not a recognized research output.

My colleague, Matthew Brett, was initially concerned less about reproducibility itself and more about the way neuroimaging software concentrated power: the dominant analysis tools were effectively single-owner open source, with one lab setting priorities and methods for the field.

> If you disagreed with those methods, your options were to fork that single-owner project or to invest in a community-owned alternative that could be governed by the wider neuroimaging community.

Reviewer 2: At the time, were most analysis methods open enough to be "forked" in the traditional sense? Or were you expected to reconstruct them before modifying them?

Author: Most neuroimagers used a small handful of analysis packages (VoxBo, FSL, SPM, afni, and maybe a couple more). These packages were open source, but were lab owned. They typically released source tarballs with a release, but may not have had publicly available development repositories at the time. Most were GPL or MIT.

That made the politics of the software visible in a way I had not thought much about before.

## A risky solution

Perhaps naively, Matthew and I set out to build a community-owned neuroimaging platform in Python that would make analyses scriptable from raw data to published results [@10.1109/MCSE.2007.46].
Python looked like the right language, but the surrounding platform was still only half-formed.
Travis Oliphant, Eric Jones, and Pearu Peterson had released `scipy` by combining packages that they each wrote as a "superpackage" of numerical integration, optimization, special functions, and more [@10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2; @10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2].
It was built on top of `numeric`, a multi-dimensional array package maintained by Paul Dubois at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.

> Jonathan Taylor had already begun `brainstat` for fMRI analysis, John Hunter (`matplotlib`) was developing `pbrain` for EEG and ECoG analysis, and John introduced us to Fernando Pérez (`ipython` and later `jupyter`), connecting our neuroimaging effort to the broader Python tools that were taking shape around it.

Author: I expanded the acronyms. For example, the sentence now reads:
"Jonathan Taylor had already begun `brainstat` for functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) analysis, John Hunter (`matplotlib`) was developing `pbrain` for electroencephalogram (EEG) and electrocorticography (ECoG) analysis, and John introduced us to Fernando Pérez."
Alternatively, it could read
"Jonathan Taylor had already begun `brainstat` for analysis that maps brain activity by tracking blood flow, John Hunter (`matplotlib`) was developing `pbrain` for analysis that records the brain's electrical signals, and John introduced us to Fernando Pérez."

At the same time, Perry Greenfield's team at the Space Telescope Science Institute had introduced `numarray`: a second, incompatible array implementation aimed at very large images. New projects were encouraged to use it, older ones could not easily migrate, and no agreed path to unification existed [@oliphant2004status; @oliphant2004comments].

> Meanwhile, the `numpy-discussion` list and the SciPy conference acted as shared communication spaces across this divide, so the same people were discussing `numeric` and `numarray` even as their code bases remained split.

Reviewer 2: This is the first point you introduce the SciPy conference, but later you actually elaborate more about its creation, so this last sentence reads a little bit out of sync. Do you mean to bring it up here to allude to its creation?

Author: Probably simplest to remove the reference to the conference here.

The eventual library kept numeric's efficiency for small arrays, but its user interface and many higher-level features were closer to numarray than to Numeric.

## Building the foundation

While transformational in its unification of the ecosystem, `numpy 1.0` was just the beginning of what needed to be built.
A scientific computing platform, comparable to what MATLAB or IDL provided, required far more: a vast collection of mature, performant algorithms spanning optimization, signal processing, linear algebra, statistics, differential equations, and more; a plotting system; an interactive environment; and the documentation, testing, and packaging infrastructure that makes all of it installable, trustworthy, and teachable.
But, importantly, resolving the array fragmentation that had made building on the ecosystem feel risky, `numpy` gave the community a single stable library to build on, together.

<!--
https://github.com/numpy/numpy/graphs/contributors?from=10%2F5%2F2006&to=3%2F13%2F2009
https://github.com/scipy/scipy/graphs/contributors?from=10%2F5%2F2006&to=3%2F13%2F2009

> -->

Reviewer 2: Did you want to include these?

Author: No, they were just notes.

Over the following two years, David and Stéfan became two of the most active committers to both `numpy` and `scipy`, working alongside long-time contributors, remote collaborators, and newer volunteers to restructure and expand the library, build and improve the test infrastructure, standardize and vastly expand the documentation, and create development processes and tooling that made contributions from a widely distributed, cross-disciplinary community sustainable.
By the time `scipy 0.7` shipped in February 2009, the platform that had been rough and fragile in 2007 was something scientists could install, trust, and build on [@millman2009scipy070; @scipy070notes].

## Lesson 1

What started as a neuroimaging software problem did not stay one.
Looking for a way to build community-owned neuroimaging tools, rather than relying on single-owner lab software, pulled me and my collaborators into the broader scientific Python effort, because the array foundation that any such shared platform would need was itself unresolved.
Solving our problem meant first helping solve `scipy`'s.

> The Berkeley meeting turned out to be decisive.

Reviewer 2: You mentioned two Berkeley events in the last section, it might be helpful to clarify here. Do you mean the neuroimaging workshop in 2005 or the sprint in 2007? 

ETA: Your next paragraph makes clear which one you mean, but I think it still could be helpful to clarify here!

:::{important} Shared problems need shared rooms.
A mailing list can carry information, but it cannot carry the trust required to trade a position for a compromise; that trade happens face to face, and only when the people trading it have been given the standing, and the time, to spend on it.
The rooms get bigger later (a sprint, then a summit), but the trade being made in each one is the same one this paper returns to at the end.
:::

# How to grow

For the first decade, `numpy` and `scipy` developers were essentially the same people, releasing two different packages from the same small, tightly connected group.
The `scipy` toolkits, or `scikits`, began as another layer that we built on the same shared infrastructure, largely with the same hands.
The SciPy conference was organized by that same small group as well.
Over the decade that followed, each of these developed a community of its own, increasingly separate from the others and, eventually, separate from the people who had founded them.
<!--
SciPy stopped being one thing.
-->
<!--
https://web.archive.org/web/20070622150504/http://new.scipy.org/
https://web.archive.org/web/20100211214922/http://new.scipy.org/

> https://web.archive.org/web/20100419182500/http://new.scipy.org/content.html

Reviewer 2: I thought I'd check on these too...

Author: Just notes.

The enthusiasm had been "huge," he wrote, and he was ready to move quickly.
But "in order to streamline the process, we need a mailing list, version control and a website."

Getting a new project onto the SciPy infrastructure meant asking a busy administrator, sometimes including me, to add it.
The server itself was failing: `httpd` crashed spontaneously and had to be restarted manually, and adding new projects was difficult and time-consuming.
The infrastructure was not failing because anyone was neglectful.
It was old hardware, a layered history of configuration decisions, and an operating system that needed a full reinstall, all sitting under a fast-growing ecosystem and a small group who could no longer maintain it on the side.

Given the server situation, I recommended that Gaël look into other options.
That conversation was not unique; projects from statsmodels to `scikit-image` were reaching the same conclusion by the same route.
What followed was more than a technical migration. It was an identity shift.
The `scikits` had started as extensions to `scipy`, built by much the same small group, on the same shared infrastructure.

> Once they left, most stopped describing themselves that way at all.

Reviewer 2: By 'left' here, do you mean that they left developent using the shared tooling of the SciPy infrastructure?

> `scikits.learn` became scikit-learn; other projects grew up with no connection to the `scikits` name or idea whatsoever.

Reviewer 2: Do you think that by having the scikits leave and evolve out of the shared tooling allowed the ecosystem to evolve more nimbly? Do you think this was a model to allow other projects to grow and build off of `numpy` and `scipy`? Both? I think clarifying your conclusion here a bit more would be helpful.

What had been imagined as one layer of a tool stack (`numpy`, `scipy`, and the `scikits`) became part of a larger ecosystem of independent projects built on top of a shared foundation.

## Community and conference

> For the first six years, Enthought had organized the conference and Caltech's Center for Advanced Computing Research had hosted it, with Enthought sponsoring students and handling logistics.

Reviewer 2: In the past few sections you've mentioned the original meeting, the sprint, and then the conference once, but the origin of the conference and if it includes all of these--or just the conference at line 55--isn't quite clear. It sounds like from your sections that you're weaving in the importance of meetings and events to the development of tools and shared infrastructure, but the meeting evolution isn't as clearly articulated as your talk.

2008 was also the first EuroSciPy, held in Leipzig, Germany.
Travis gave the keynote.
In 2009, Prabhu Ramachandran and I co-chaired the first SciPy India Conference.
Travis gave the keynote.
<!--
https://web.archive.org/web/20190909080804/http://scipy.github.io/old-wiki/pages/EuroSciPy2008.html
https://web.archive.org/web/20251016230532/https://scipy.in/2009
https://www.space-kerala.org/first-indian-scipy-conference-held-trivandrum
-->

Conference proceedings, published and citable, were a mechanism for converting that invisible work into something a tenure file could recognize.
Papers were submitted as reStructuredText source in a public GitHub repository; review happened in the open, via pull requests attached to identifiable individuals; reviewers were acknowledged by name.
The toolchain, developed with Gaël Varoquaux and extended by Stéfan van der Walt into a system using Sphinx, LaTeX, custom scripts, and the `procbuild` preview bot, was an early instance of what would later be called "open peer review" and put into practice the principles I articulated in a 2012 paper titled "_Learning from Open Source Software Projects to Improve Scientific Review_" [cite].

> Its goal was explicitly iterative: reviewers and editors worked with authors to guide papers toward acceptance, so that submitting to SciPy meant opening your writing to the same collaborative scrutiny that good open source development demands.

Reviewer 2: I realize it is clear from context, but because you've mentioned the project scipy in this paper, I think it would be good to be explicit that you mean submitting to the SciPy conference rather than the software `scipy`. 

```suggestion
Its goal was explicitly iterative: reviewers and editors worked with authors to guide papers toward acceptance, so that submitting to the SciPy conference meant opening your writing to the same collaborative scrutiny that good open source development demands.
```

My last year as co-chair for the SciPy conference was 2011.
The people organizing the conference by then were no longer, by and large, the people maintaining the library.
That shift was deliberate in a way the infrastructure diaspora was not.

> The `scikits` left `scipy.org` because the server and processes could no longer scale; the conference moved because we wanted it to---from company stewardship to community governance, from one annual meeting in California to a network of meetings on three continents.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure the previous paragraphs really describe the community governance you're mentioning here for the meetings. Could you add some language to elaborate a bit?

At the end of the second decade we faced a new problem: there was no longer anyone with the mandate, or the mechanism, to hold the ecosystem together.
As individual projects matured, whole scientific domains (neuroimaging, geospatial data science, high-energy physics) developed their own internal coordination structures, mailing lists, and governance conventions.
This domain-level organization was healthy in many respects.
It also meant that an increasing amount of work that was really ecosystem-wide in scope, packaging standards, CI practices, documentation tooling, was being developed in domain-specific silos and reinvented independently across communities.
Newer maintainers and contributors built careers within a single project or domain rather than across several.
The cross-disciplinary experience that those of us who had been there at the beginning carried was no longer naturally transmitted to the next generation.
The `scipy.org` website (nominally maintained by the `scipy` library team, effectively serving as the ecosystem's front door) had become a symbol of that failure of transmission: a shared resource that no one had the mandate to govern.

## Ecosystem coordination

> In 2020, Stéfan and I co-founded the _Scientific Python_ project with support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation [@scientificpython2020planning] to provide what the ecosystem needed, not the SciPy server's centralized infrastructure, which individual projects had rightly outgrown, but a shared layer above the individual projects: cross-project recommendations, developer summits that worked like the early sprints (small, cross-disciplinary, and work-focused), shared tooling and discussion forums, and a common landing page for the ecosystem `scientific-python.org`.

Reviewer 2: This might be a bit in the weeds, but you could mention in the previous section that prior to 2020 some of the needs of ecosystem coordination across projects were also becoming apparent. What would eventually become SPEC 0 was discussed at SciPy and created as a NEP because that was one place, at the time, that felt natural to do some ecosystem coordination. What Scientific Python did was perfect for the moment, and the growth is a reflection of that.

The undergraduate curriculum built on that foundation, Data 8 and Data 100, uses NumPy, SciPy, Matplotlib, and Jupyter notebooks as the substrate for the largest introductory and largest upper-division courses at Berkeley, where thousands of students each semester do hands-on computational work without sacrificing rigor [cite].
That curriculum did not stay on campus: more than fifty universities and colleges have since adopted Data 8 or its components, several through Berkeley-supported partnerships with the National Science Foundation's CloudBank project that extended the same open-source, cloud-based teaching stack to community colleges and other UC campuses [cite].

BIDS today is where that convergence is easiest to see.
Fernando is now the Faculty Director, a decade after co-founding it; Stéfan and Min work there on the technical and infrastructure side; Kirstie, the graduate student whose career had once been redirected by conversations with Cindee, returned in 2025 as BIDS's Executive Director; and I lead Berkeley's Open Source Program Office from within it.

> Fernando has written that Berkeley's leadership in this stack "is not 'owned' by Berkeley," but built by scientists who "partner with an extended, distributed community of other researchers and developers to build an ecosystem that benefits all" [cite].

Reviewer 2: citation needed here.

That trust is what let Matthew, Fernando Pérez, and me spend real time on scientific Python and, later, Jupyter, work that was not in any of our job descriptions and that did not, on its own, advance the neuroscience questions the lab was trying to answer.

Mark gave me the freedom to decide, together with Matthew and Fernando, what the major problems on the horizon were, and then to work on them.
He gave us shared space, in the literal sense of desks in the same building, and a subtler kind of space: freedom from having to justify that work in terms of our immediate career prospects.
That combination, more than any specific decision about software or method, is what let a small group inside a neuroimaging lab become a nucleus that drew in others and helped grow two community-owned ecosystems.

Being embedded in a neuroimaging lab rather than a software lab shaped our work.
Our colleagues were neuroscientists, not programmers, so anything we built had to be installable, learnable, and usable by people who had no interest in becoming software developers.

> That constraint pushed us toward teaching as much as toward building: writing documentation and tutorials, running hands-on sessions, and treating the question of how someone would learn a tool as inseparable from the question of how to design it.

Reviewer 2: As I'm reading this, I'm really struck by how the effect of needing the tools for teaching, not just building, affected the development of the ecosystem. I'm so glad you've included this framing. It is making me think a bit about how that might uniquely influence how something grows...

--- [https://nipy.org/nipy/mission.html](https://nipy.org/nipy/mission.html)
:::
-->

Our collaborations with astronomers, physicists, and statisticians meant our tools were constantly tested against needs that had nothing to do with neuroimaging, which kept our discussions from narrowing into a closed conversation among people who already agreed with each other.
It also connected us to larger conversations about open science and reproducibility that were happening well outside any one department, so the problems we were facing were visibly the same problems other fields were running into.

Matthew, Fernando, and I were lucky.
Many of the people who built and sustained this ecosystem did not have a Mark D'Esposito, and did the work anyway: on nights and weekends, on volunteered time, on the strength of believing in something their institutions gave them no formal credit for.
Some took real career risks to keep contributing.
Many could not sustain that position indefinitely and left for industry, where the demands of a job rarely leave room for the kind of unstructured, long-horizon tinkering that built the scientific Python and Jupyter ecosystems.

> The space that made this possible was never distributed evenly, and a great deal of this ecosystem was built by people paying, personally, for a trust their own institutions were unwilling to extend.

Reviewer 2: > for a trust their own institutions were unwilling to extend. 

This juxtaposition is especially devastating after reading about the breadth of contributions from the community.

That is changing.
BIDS is one attempt to make institutionally what Mark gave informally: room, trust, and time, backed by something more durable than one director's goodwill.

> But these remain exceptions rather than the norm, and they are not yet enough to catch everyone this ecosystem depended on and then let go.

Reviewer 2: If these are exceptions rather than the norm, is it really changing?

:::{important} It was the space to build it.
This ecosystem lasted because some people were trusted to decide what mattered and given time to work on it.
It has also lost contributors, and capacity, because that trust was never extended widely or durably enough.
Making it durable is the work still ahead.
:::

# Conclusion

This account is mine, but the pattern it traces is not.
A concrete problem that outgrows its original domain, a small group that chooses to share a room until an aspiration becomes a plan, and a foundation later reorganized (deliberately or under pressure) into something many hands can sustain: this arc is not unique to numpy, scipy, or Berkeley, and other ground-up collaborations may recognize some version of it in their own histories.
It is fitting that this account spans almost exactly the twenty-five years the SciPy conference itself has now completed.

> The same needs that pulled a handful of neuroimagers, astronomers, and statisticians into one room in 2005 are what still pull new communities into this one today, and the work of extending enough trust, time, and institutional support to sustain them is, a quarter century on, still not finished.

Reviewer 2: I also particularly love this conclusion. It reads perfectly for the moment.
